Creatinine Test
Purpose of the test
The primary use of a creatinine test is to better understand how well the kidneys are working. A measurement of creatinine can be employed for screening, diagnosis, and/or monitoring of kidney problems.
Screening is trying to identify health problems before there are any signs or symptoms. If you are at higher risk of kidney problems, a creatinine test may be used to try to detect a problem early.
Diagnosis involves testing to determine the underlying cause after signs and/or symptoms have developed. Creatinine may be measured to help diagnose symptoms that can be associated with kidney problems, such as swelling in the feet, urinary changes, loss of appetite, and fatigue. A measurement of creatinine may also be included in a panel of tests for more general symptoms or when evaluating you in the emergency room.
Monitoring is how doctors track your condition over time. If you have kidney disease, a creatinine test can explain how the disease may progress. Tests of kidney function can also be used to watch for potential side effects when you have prescribed medications that can affect the kidneys.
In many cases, screening, diagnosis, and monitoring kidney problems involve more than just a creatinine measurement. For example, creatinine may be tested to calculate theestimated glomerular filtration rate(eGFR), which assesses how effectively the kidneys filter the blood.
What does the test measure?
A creatinine test measures the total amount of the substance in the blood or urine. Creatinine is a waste byproduct of the normal metabolism of creatine, a compound that provides the body’s muscles with the energy they need. In this process, some creatine breaks down into creatinine.
To clear this waste product from the body, the kidneys filter creatinine out of the blood and facilitate its removal from the body in urine.
A serum creatinine test measures the amount of creatinine in a blood sample. And a urine creatinine test measures the total amount of creatinine in all urine produced during a 24-hour period. These two values can also be compared in acreatinine clearancetest.
Creatinine may be measured as part of other tests. For example, it may be included as part of abasic metabolic panel(BMP) orcomprehensive metabolic panel(CMP). These tests help assess the body’s energy use, electrolyte levels, and kidney function.
When should I get this test?
A creatinine test is often prescribed when your active signs, symptoms, or overall health history reflect an elevated risk of kidney problems.
If you have symptoms that could be caused by an underlying problem affecting your kidneys, a creatinine test may be part of the diagnostic process.
But if you don’t have symptoms, your doctor may suggest a creatinine test to screen for kidney problems if you have an increased risk of kidney disease. Some risk factors for kidney disease include:
Diabetes
A family history of kidney problems
High blood pressure
If you take a medication that has the potential to affect kidney function, you may receive periodic creatinine testing to check for this side effect.
A creatinine test should first be performed to assess kidney function if you are scheduled to have a CT (computed tomography) imaging procedure with intravenous contrast.
Creatinine testing can also monitor your kidney health if you’ve had an abnormal kidney function test before or have already been diagnosed with kidney disease.
A creatinine measurement may be taken as part of a BMP or CMP during a regular health checkup. Although there is little evidence showing the benefits of this kind of screening in otherwise healthy people, some doctors prescribe these panels during routine patient care.
Receiving test results
The results from either a blood or urine creatinine test are generally available within a few business days after you take the test. You may receive a call or email from your doctor about the results, or a test report in the mail or online.
For at-home test kits that require sending your blood sample to a lab, it may take a few extra days for results to become available. With these tests, you normally access the test report through a smartphone app or website.
Interpreting test results
Creatinine tests are generally used to assess kidney function. Under normal circumstances, creatinine levels are stable, reflecting typical muscle activity and the filtering and removal of creatinine from the bloodstream.
There is no single reference range for all creatinine tests or for all people. Measurements can vary between laboratories, so it is important to look carefully at your test report to see the listed reference range for the lab that conducted your test.
Creatinine’s reference range also depends on whether it is measured in the blood or urine. The American Board of Internal Medicine lists the following reference ranges for blood and urine creatinine:
Blood: 0.7 to 1.3 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) for males and 0.5 to 1.1 mg/dL for females.
Blood
Urine: 15-25 milligrams per kilogram of body weight (mg/kg) per 24 hours.
Urine
When creatinine levels rise to abnormal levels, it may be an indication that the kidneys are not properly filtering the blood. The creatinine level may be used to calculate your eGFR, which assesses kidney filtration function.
Elevated creatinine can also be tied to dehydration, diseases that cause muscle problems, and some complications during pregnancy.
If creatinine levels are lower than expected, it may be a sign of malnutrition or conditions that provoke the loss of muscle mass.
A normal creatinine level does not guarantee kidney health. Moderate kidney impairment may not cause creatinine to rise to abnormal levels, so creatinine tests may not identify some cases of early kidney disease.
A number of individual factors, such as age, diet, and muscle mass, can affect creatinine levels, so it is important to remember your test should be interpreted with the help of your doctor in the context of your specific situation. This interpretation will also depend on why the test was ordered and whether you have any symptoms. Sometimes a doctor may prefer using a different test (such as Cystatin C) to assess a particular patient’s kidney function.
When creatinine is measured in panel tests, it may be interpreted in conjunction with other test findings. For example, the amount of creatinine relative toblood urea nitrogen(BUN), another waste product, may provide useful information for the doctor about the cause of kidney issues.
To help understand your creatinine test result, you can bring up some of the following questions when discussing the test with your doctor:
What was the reference range for the laboratory that did my test?
What was my creatinine level? Was it normal or abnormal?
Are there any individual factors that might affect the accuracy or meaning of my creatinine test?
Should I have another kidney function test now or in the future?
Are there any other follow-up tests that you recommend? Why or why not?

Sodium Test
Purpose of the test
A sodium blood test is used to detect an abnormal sodium level, including low sodium (hyponatremia) and high sodium (hypernatremia). It is often used as part of anelectrolyte panelorbasic metabolic panelfor a routine health exam.
A blood sodium test may also be used to:
Help detect, evaluate, and monitor electrolyte imbalances and/or acid-base (pH) imbalances (acidosis or alkalosis)
Detect the cause and help monitor the treatment if you have dehydration or excess fluid buildup (edema)
Help evaluate and monitor a variety of chronic or acute illnesses involving the brain, lungs, liver, heart, kidney, thyroid, or adrenal glands
Monitor if you are taking medications that can affect sodium levels, such as diuretics
Urine sodium levels may be tested if you have abnormal blood sodium levels to help determine whether an imbalance is due to, for example, consuming too much or losing too much of the mineral. Also, if you have abnormal kidney test results, urine sodium testing may help your health practitioner determine the cause of kidney disease and help guide treatment.
As the meals we eat on a given day affect our sodium levels, a 24-hour urine sodium test can be helpful to your health practitioner to reduce the impact of a single meal on the urine sodium result.
What does the test measure?
Sodium is anelectrolytein all body fluids that is vital to normal body function, including nerve and muscle function. This test measures sodium levels in the blood and/or urine.
Electrolytes are minerals that carry a charge and exist in your body fluids. Sodium and other electrolytes such aspotassium,chloride, andbicarbonate (or total CO2)help cells function normally and regulate the body’s fluid. While sodium is present in all body fluids, it is found in the highest concentration in the blood and the fluid outside of the body’s cells. This extracellular sodium, as well as all body water, is regulated by the kidneys.
We get sodium in our diet from table salt (sodium chloride or NaCl) and, to some degree, from most foods we eat. Most people have an adequate intake of sodium. The body uses what it requires, and the kidneys eliminate the rest in the urine. The body tries to keep the blood sodium within a very narrow range. It does this by:
Producing hormones that can increase (natriuretic peptides) or decrease (aldosterone) the amount of sodium eliminated in urine
Producing a hormone that prevents water losses, known asantidiuretic hormone (ADH) and, sometimes called vasopressin
Controlling thirst; even a 1% increase in blood sodium will make you thirsty and cause you to drink water, returning the sodium level to normal
When the level of sodium in the blood changes, the water content in the body also changes. These shifts can be associated with too little fluid (dehydration) or too much fluid (edema), often resulting in leg swelling.
When should I get this test?
Sodium testing may be ordered as part of anelectrolyte panelormetabolic panelduring a routine health exam or when you are being evaluated for an acute or chronic illness.
A blood sodium test may be ordered when we have signs and symptoms of low sodium, such as:
Weakness, fatigue
Confusion
Lethargy
In severe cases, coma
However, there may be no symptoms when the sodium level falls slowly. That is why sodium levels are often checked, even if you have no specific symptoms.
Sodium blood testing may be ordered when having signs and symptoms of high sodium, such as:
Thirst
Dry mucous membranes (e.g., mouth, eyes)
Less frequent urination
Muscle twitching
Agitation
In severe cases (extremely high concentrations), restlessness, acting irrationally, coma, or convulsions
Sodium and other electrolytes may be measured when monitoring treatment with intravenous (IV) fluids or when there is a possibility of developing dehydration.
Electrolyte panels and basic metabolic panels are also commonly ordered regularly when monitoring the treatment of certain conditions, including high blood pressure, heart failure, and liver and kidney disease.
A random or 24-hour urine sodium test may be ordered when a blood sodium test result is abnormal to help determine the cause of the imbalance or to monitor treatment.


Table:
Age | Conventional Units2 | SI Units3
0-18 years | Not available due to wide variability. See child’s lab report for reference range.
Adult | 136-145 mEq/L | 136-145 mmol/L
>90 years | 132-146 mEq/L | 132-146 mmol/L

Receiving test results
The doctor who ordered your sodium test may share the results with you, or you may be able to access them through an online patient portal. Sodium results are usually available within a few business days.
Interpreting test results
Sodium levels are typically interpreted along with results from other tests done simultaneously, such as the results of otherelectrolyte tests. Various conditions and diseases can cause low and high sodium levels.
Examples of conditions that can cause low blood sodium (hyponatremia) include:
Losing too much sodium, most commonly from conditions such as diarrhea, vomiting, excessive sweating, use of diuretics, kidney disease, or low levels of cortisol, aldosterone, and sex hormones (Addison disease)
Drinking too much water as might occur during exercise
Excess fluid buildup in the body (edema) caused by heart failure, cirrhosis, and kidney diseases that cause protein loss (nephrotic syndrome)
Conditions that lead to too muchADH, causing you to keep too much water in the body; this can happen with several diseases, particularly those involving the brain and the lungs, many kinds of cancer, and with use of some drugs
Examples of conditions that can cause a high blood sodium level (hypernatremia) include:
Dehydration, losing too much water without drinking enough water, is a common cause.
Cushing syndrome
Diabetes insipidus, a condition caused by too little ADH
Rarely, too much salt in the diet
Sodium Reference Range
Sodium Reference Range
The reference ranges1provided here represent a theoretical guideline that should not be used to interpret your test results. Some variation is likely between these numbers and the reference range reported by the lab that ran your test. Please consult your health care provider.
1from Tietz Textbook of Clinical Chemistry and Molecular Diagnostics. Burtis CA, Ashwood ER, Bruns DE, eds. 5th edition, St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders; 2011.2Conventional Units are typically used for reporting results in U.S. labs3SI Units are used to report lab results outside of the U.S.
Sodium urine concentrations must be compared with sodium blood levels. The body normally eliminates excess sodium, so the concentration in the urine may be elevated because it is so in the blood. It may also be elevated in the urine when the body loses too much sodium; in this case, the blood level would be normal to low. If blood sodium levels are low due to insufficient intake, urine concentrations will also be low.
Decreased urine sodium levels may indicate dehydration, congestive heart failure, liver disease, or nephrotic syndrome
Increased urine sodium levels may indicate diuretic use or Addison disease
Sodium levels are often evaluated in relation to other electrolytes and can be used to calculate a quantity termed anion gap.
You may want to ask your doctor the following questions:
What is the recommended dietary salt intake?
What can I do to decrease my low or high salt levels risk?
Should I pay particular attention to rehydrating after playing sports or exercising to keep my sodium levels up?

Potassium Test
Purpose of the test
Tests that measure potassium have multiple applications in clinical medicine. Whether potassium is tested alone or as part of a panel, it can be part of diagnosis, monitoring, or screening evaluation.
After signs or symptoms of a health problem have occurred, diagnosis is the process of finding the cause. High or low potassium levels can cause multiple types of symptoms, which can prompt potassium testing. An imbalance in electrolytes can affect virtually all body systems, so panel tests are frequently used to diagnose many different disorders.
Because the kidneys are centrally involved in regulating potassium levels, a potassium test is often used to help evaluate the status of your kidneys. Potassium also plays an important role in healthy heart function. It is involved in the electric signal functioning of the heart muscle, so potassium levels are frequently checked if you have heart-related symptoms.
Potassium tests are also used for monitoring, which is testing that tracks your condition over time. When treatment is given for abnormal potassium levels, repeat testing can indicate how well that treatment is working. Repeat testing of potassium alone or in a panel can also be part of the ongoing evaluation of the kidneys or cardiovascular system.
Measuring potassium and other electrolytes is common if you are in the hospital or are taking many different kinds of medications. A proper electrolyte balance is vital for maintaining fluid levels, acid-base balance, and overall health, so regular monitoring of potassium and other electrolytes is frequently done in these settings.
Screening is often called early detection because it is testing that happens before there are any signs or symptoms of a health problem.
With potassium testing, screening is most common in people who have a higher risk for kidney or cardiovascular disease, such as those with diabetes or high blood pressure. This testing is not standard for healthy adults without this elevated risk, but some primary care doctors may include it as part of blood testing during routine checkups for adults.
When tested for screening, potassium is usually part of a panel that also measures other electrolytes. Panel tests for screening may also include other proteins and compounds in the blood that can inform the doctor about kidney function.
What does the test measure?
A potassium test measures the amount of the mineral in a blood (serum or plasma) or urine sample.
Potassium, an essential nutrient found throughout the body, is necessary for healthy cell activity. Without potassium, the heart and other muscles cannot function.
Diet, made up of the foods and drinks you consume, is the source of potassium. Some people also obtain potassium from dietary supplements.
Under normal circumstances, your body absorbs and stores the potassium it needs, and the kidneys primarily remove any excess through urine. In this way, a potassium measurement can detect disruptions to how the body stores, uses, and excretes potassium.
Blood levels of potassium are frequently measured in a panel test along with other electrolytes, includingsodium,chloride, andbicarbonate.
In some urine potassium tests,creatinineis measured along with potassium. A waste material that is a byproduct of muscle activity, creatinine is excreted at a relatively steady pace daily. Simultaneous measuring urine creatinine normalizes the potassium excretion, independent of how many fluids you consume before the test and how diluted your urine is, without having to do a full 24-hour urine collection.
When should I get this test?
There are diverse circumstances in which a potassium test can be prescribed.
For diagnosis, a potassium blood test is usually performed if you have symptoms that could be related to an abnormal potassium level. Examples of symptoms of high potassium include an irregular heartbeat, muscle weakness, and nausea. Low potassium can cause heartbeat changes, fatigue, muscle cramps and twitches, nausea, and constipation.
Measurement of electrolytes, including potassium, is frequently done if the doctor suspects that you have possible heart issues, kidney problems, or a disturbance of the body’s acid-base balance.
In addition, electrolyte testing is common if you have general symptoms or are being evaluated in an emergency room or urgent care clinic. Because electrolytes play a role in all bodily functions, this testing, including measuring potassium, can help identify an underlying cause of pressing health problems.
Most potassium testing is blood testing, which is used to diagnose high potassium levels, known as hyperkalemia, or low potassium, called hypokalemia. However, in some cases, urine potassium testing is needed to help determine why levels are low.
For monitoring, potassium and other electrolyte tests may be repeated multiple times at regular intervals to detect any abnormal changes. This is often done if you take medications that can affect your kidneys or overall electrolyte balance. If you are taking diuretics or other intravenous drugs in the hospital, you may have frequent monitoring with electrolyte tests.
Screening for abnormal potassium levels typically occurs as part of a panel test performed during routine medical checkups. While doctors can prescribe this testing for any patient, it is usually reserved if you have high blood pressure, diabetes, or a family history of kidney problems.
Receiving test results
In most cases, results for both blood and urine potassium tests are available within a period of a few business days.
Test results can be sent by mail or accessible through online health portals. You may also receive a call or email from your doctor to either review your results or schedule a follow-up appointment.
Interpreting test results
Interpretation of a potassium test requires carefully considering the result, the laboratory reference range, and your health situation. Because potassium is frequently measured with other electrolytes, levels may be evaluated together.
For a blood test, the report should list the amount of potassium measured in either milliequivalents per liter (mEq/L) or millimoles per liter (mmol/L). The test report will also show a reference range, which the laboratory considers an expected range for potassium levels.
A common reference range for potassium is from around 3.5 to 5 mmol/L, although there can be slight variation between laboratories. For this reason, it is important to look for the specific reference interval listed on your test report.
Too much potassium in the blood is called hyperkalemia. This can signify that the kidneys are not properly removing excess potassium from the blood and excreting it from the body in urine. It is often related to certain medications that prevent the kidneys from regulating potassium levels, but other kidney disorders (such as acute or chronic kidney failure) may also cause it.
High potassium levels can also occur when too much potassium is released into the blood from inside cells where it is normally stored. This can be caused by burns or other injuries (eg, severe tissue trauma, hemolysis), and conditions that affect the acid-base balance in the body.
In many cases, high potassium levels are the result of multiple causes. Increasing potassium intake from diet or supplements rarely causes hyperkalemia alone. Still, when paired with reduced kidney function or other contributing factors, increased intake may spur a rise in blood levels of potassium.
False hyperkalemia may occur if blood samples are not collected and handled properly. For example, if red cells are destroyed during the collection procedure.
Too little potassium in the blood is known as hypokalemia. Hypokalemia most often can happen after taking diuretic medications that increase urination. Diarrhea, vomiting, and profuse sweating may also cause fluid loss that diminishes blood levels of potassium. Less often, hypokalemia results from insufficient potassium intake due to poor diet or health conditions that increase the amount of potassium stored in cells.
Urine potassium tests are normally only used if a blood potassium test is abnormal. For a urine potassium test, your report will show either the total level of potassium measured in a 24-hour sample or the ratio of potassium to creatinine in a one-time urine sample.
The report should show the laboratory’s reference range for urine potassium levels as with a blood test. Checking this reference range is important because laboratories can vary depending on their measurement methods.
Causes of abnormal urine potassium levels are often similar to the causes that can affect blood potassium levels. When urine potassium is measured, it may help doctors identify the most likely cause of abnormal levels, including whether the kidney is properly enabling potassium excretion from the body.
Asking questions can help you understand the meaning of your potassium test results. When you talk with your doctor, some of these questions may be helpful to review:
Was my potassium level low, normal, or high?
Were any other measurements taken along with potassium? If so, were they normal or abnormal?
If my potassium was too high or too low, what is the most likely cause?
Are there any follow-up tests that you recommend?
Should I have another potassium test?
Should I make any changes to my diet?

Alkaline Phosphatase (ALP) Test
Purpose of the test
The purpose of testing ALP is to determine if you have normal levels of this enzyme. An ALP blood test can be used for screening, diagnosis, and monitoring of liver or bone diseases and other health conditions.
Screeningis checking for health problems before any symptoms have occurred. This rarely measures ALP alone, but it is a standard part of multi-measurement tests such as aliver panelandcomprehensive metabolic panel(CMP). These tests may be prescribed as part of a routine checkup to screen for a range of potential health problems.
Screening
Diagnosisis the process of finding the cause after symptoms have developed. ALP is most often tested for diagnosis when there are signs of possible liver problems, such as nausea and vomiting, jaundice, fatigue, abdominal pain, or unexplained weight loss.
Diagnosis
It is also often prescribed if you have symptoms of a possible bone disorder, such as bone pain, susceptibility to bone fractures, or abnormal bone shape. ALP measurement as part of a liver panel or CMP may help identify the cause of general symptoms.
While ALP levels alone are insufficient to diagnose an underlying condition, they can be an important part of the diagnostic process. The degree of ALP elevation may reflect the type or severity of a condition. An ALP isoenzyme test to measure specific kinds of ALP can help determine the part of the body affected and assist in diagnosing the problem.
Monitoringis tracking the course of a health condition or your response to treatment. An ALP test, often as part of a panel, may be used to see if liver disease or other conditions are improving, worsening, or staying the same.
Monitoring
What does the test measure?
This test measures ALP, which is a type of enzyme. The typical measurement for this test is international units per liter (IU/L), a standardized measurement utilized by most laboratories based on the biological activity of ALP.
ALP’s exact function in the body is not fully understood, but researchers believe it to be important to multiple processes. The enzyme can be found in the liver, bones, placenta of pregnant women, intestine, kidneys, and other body parts. Abnormal levels in the blood can reflect damage to tissue or disruption of normal processes in the body.
Another type of ALP testing is an ALP isoenzyme or ALP fractionation test. In this test, specific subtypes of ALP are measured. These subtypes indicate where in the body the ALP was produced. While this testing can be beneficial, it is technically challenging and much less common than general ALP testing.
When should I get this test?
When ALP is tested, it is most often part of a panel test that includes other measurements that can reflect liver and kidney health. For example, the liver panel and CMP may measure ALP as part of a routine checkup or if you have symptoms that could be caused by liver or kidney conditions.
Testing for ALP alone may be conducted when you have symptoms of a problem affecting your liver or bones. It may also help monitor your response to treatment for liver or bone diseases.
ALP isoenzyme tests are most common as a follow-up after finding abnormal levels of ALP on a prior test.
Because testing for ALP can be used in many different medical contexts, a physician can best determine when it should be prescribed.
Receiving test results
ALP test results are normally available within a few business days after the lab receives your sample. Your test report may be sent in the mail or electronically, and your doctor’s office may also contact you to share your test results.
Receiving results may take a few extra days for at-home tests because your test sample has to be sent by mail to the laboratory. The test report is normally accessible online or with a smartphone app, although you may also be contacted by a health professional that works for the at-home testing company.
Interpreting test results
Your test report will show your measured ALP level, usually reported in international units per liter (IU/L). The report may also list a reference range, which can vary from laboratory to laboratory. One common reference range is from 44 to 147 IU/L, but some professional organizations recommend a range of 30-120 IU/L. For this reason, it’s important to check your test report for the lab’s reference range that analyzed your sample.
Elevated ALP can be indicative of liver or bone diseases as well as many other types of conditions. But high ALP levels are not always a sign of a problem. Interpretation of your test results can involve consideration of multiple factors:
The degree of elevation: Very high levels are often seen with blockages of the bile ducts, but these levels alone cannot distinguish between liver problems and other conditions.
Other test measurements: ALP is often measured along with other enzymes, such asaspartate aminotransferase(AST),alanine aminotransferase(ALT),gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT), and/or 5′-nucleotidase (5’-NT), and the levels of ALP relative to these enzymes can help determine the significance of your test result.
Your overall health: Any symptoms you are experiencing will be considered alongside your ALP levels.
Your doctor can account for the fact that ALP levels can be elevated without any underlying illness. For example, ALP is usually higher in pregnant women, growing children and adolescents, and older adults. ALP produced in the intestine can also increase after fatty meals for people with certain blood types.
Abnormally low ALP levels are less common but can occur due to malnutrition, nutrient deficiencies, hypothyroidism, and some rare inherited disorders that affect ALP or liver function. Persistently low levels of ALP could indicate hypophosphatasia (HPP), a rare genetic disorder of bone metabolism.
If you have ALP isoenzyme testing, your test report will show levels for different types of ALP. Elevations of specific sources of ALP can identify the location of tissue damage or another disease in the body.
Regardless of the type of ALP test that you take, it is important to discuss your test results with your doctor, who can best explain what they mean for your health and whether any other testing would be beneficial.
As you discuss your test report with your doctor, these questions may help you better understand your situation and the most appropriate next steps in your care:
What did the test show about my ALP levels?
Were any other measurements taken in addition to ALP? What can you learn from those measurements?
Do you recommend any other tests? What are the pros and cons of different follow-up tests?

Alanine Aminotransferase (ALT)
Purpose of the test
The purpose of an ALT test is to help assess the health of the liver. Damage to cells in the liver can cause ALT to leak into the blood, so a test can help detect liver problems.
ALT is commonly tested with other liver enzymes and compounds in the blood. Together, these measurements can be used for diagnosis, screening, and monitoring.
Diagnosisis testing that happens after symptoms have started. Its goal is to find the problem or cause for symptoms. ALT testing may be useful in the diagnosis of symptoms that can be tied to liver problems like nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain, itching, jaundice, fatigue, and appetite loss.
Diagnosis
Screeningtries to find health problems before any symptoms have occurred. With some liver conditions, ALT levels may rise in the blood before symptoms begin, so testing for ALT and other liver enzymes may be ordered for early detection. This is usually recommended if you have risk factors for liver disease, such as heavy alcohol use, diabetes, obesity, or a family history of liver problems. Even if you don’t have risk factors, order tests that measure ALT during routine health checkups.
Screening
Monitoringincludes all the methods used to keep track of how your condition progresses. If you have had liver disease or an abnormal ALT test, ongoing testing may be used to see how your levels change over time. ALT and liver enzyme tests can also monitor for side effects of medications affecting liver health and function.
Monitoring
What does the test measure?
An ALT test measures the level of this enzyme, ALT, in your blood.
ALT is one of several enzymes that help the liver function properly. Although small amounts of ALT can be found in other parts of the body, it is predominantly found in the liver.
In most cases, ALT is not measured by itself. Instead, ALT is normally one of several measurements in a liver panel or CMP. Taking multiple measurements along with ALT provides more context for evaluating liver health.
When should I get an ALT test?
ALT testing is appropriate in a range of medical circumstances. It is often prescribed as an initial diagnostic test if you have symptoms that could be explained by an underlying problem affecting your liver.
Even if you have general symptoms, a panel test that includes ALT may be used in the diagnostic process. The liver panel or CMP, including ALT, may be part of a basic evaluation in urgent care or the emergency room.
As a tool for early detection of liver disease, ALT can be periodically measured with other liver enzymes even if you don’t have any symptoms. Your doctor may recommend screening involving ALT if you are at higher risk of liver disease.
ALT testing may also be included in your typical medical checkups. But data is limited to show that widespread screening offers more benefits than downsides, including added medical costs and unnecessary medical procedures.
Follow-up ALT testing can be used if you’ve had a previous test with an abnormal result. If you’ve been diagnosed with liver disease in the past, repeated ALT testing can help monitor the progression of the disease. When your doctor prescribes a medication that can affect your liver, ALT testing can be a tool to watch for unwanted side effects.
Receiving test results
Results for your ALT test are usually available within a few business days. You may be told of your test results by your doctor’s office. Usually, you can also obtain a copy of the test report by mail or electronically.
Results from at-home tests of ALT are typically accessed electronically through a smartphone app or a specific website. Getting the results may take a few extra days because of the time it takes for your sample to arrive by mail to the laboratory.
Interpreting test results
The test report should have a line that shows both your ALT level as well as the reference range that the laboratory uses to categorize ALT levels as normal or abnormal. In most cases, ALT will be measured in units per liter (U/L) or international units per liter (IU/L).
When reviewing your results, remember there is no universal reference range for ALT. There can be variation in laboratory methods that affect what is considered normal. For this reason, it’s important to look at the range provided by the specific lab that analyzed your blood.
Most often, ALT is tested along with other liver enzymes and proteins in a panel test. Your test report will show your levels and the lab’s reference range for each measurement. This is important because your test results are interpreted by looking at these test components together.
High levels of ALT can be a result of damage or injury to cells. Because ALT is most concentrated in the liver, abnormal ALT test results are generally associated with conditions affecting the liver, such as inflammation (hepatitis) and scarring (cirrhosis).
At the same time, ALT can be elevated without any underlying health problem. Multiple factors can affect ALT; in most cases, high ALT is not a sign of severe liver disease.
To interpret your test result, your doctor takes multiple factors into account. These include your current health and health history as well as the levels of other measurements on your test. In addition, your doctor may consider individual factors that can influence your normal level of ALT, including:
Exercise:Intense or extreme exercise can cause a temporary boost in ALT levels.
Exercise:
Medications:A number of medications and supplements can alter ALT measurements.
Medications:
Sex:Males typically have higher levels of ALT, which is believed to be related to hormonal differences.
Sex:
Menstruation:ALT levels can go up or down during the course of the menstrual cycle.
Menstruation:
Age:There is a tendency for ALT levels to decrease with older age, although the exact reason for this is not known.
Age:
Body mass index:Several research studies have found an association between ALT levels and body mass index, which may change the interpretation of test results in people with obesity.
Body mass index:
When ALT levels are very high, it may indicate an acute liver problem. Mild or moderate elevation, especially if it persists on several tests over time, can be an indicator of a chronic disease. However, the degree of elevation alone is not a reliable predictor of the extent of injury to the liver.
Because many types of liver problems can cause ALT levels to increase, the test alone cannot identify an underlying cause. Although uncommon, ALT can be elevated as a result of disease outside the liver. Looking at how ALT levels relate to other liver enzymes can provide clues that may help the doctor assess your situation and recommend any appropriate follow-up testing.
Your physician can best help you understand the diverse factors affecting your interpretation of your ALT test and what your results mean for your overall health.
A conversation with your doctor about your ALT test can help ensure that you are informed about your results. Some of the following questions may make it easier to cover key information when you talk with your physician:
What was my ALT level? Was it in the normal reference range?
Were any other measurements taken? If so, were they normal or abnormal?
What do the test results mean for my overall health?
Do you recommend any follow-up tests? If so, which ones, and what are their benefits and risks?

Cholesterol Test


Table:
Demographic Group | Risk Factors | Screening Frequency
Children | None | Once between ages 7-11; again between 17-21
Children | 1 or more | Every 1-3 years starting when risk factor is identified
Children | High risk of familial hypercholesterolemia | Age 3, between 9-11, and age 18
Adolescents and adults | 1 or more | At least every 5 years; often annually
Men age 20-45Women age 20-55 | None | Every 5 years
Men age 45-65Women age 55-65 | None | Every 1-2 years
Men and women over 65 | None or risk factors present | Annually

Purpose of the test
Cholesterol testing is often used as part of a cardiac risk assessment. Too much cholesterol in the blood can damage arteries and blood vessels and elevate the risk for stroke, heart attack, and heart disease.
Total cholesterol may be measured as part of cholesterol screening, which is looking for signs of risks to cardiovascular health in people who have not shown any symptoms. When used for screening, total cholesterol is typically one component of the lipid panel, which also determines levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL or “good”) cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein (LDL or “bad”) cholesterol, and triglycerides.
Depending on the results from initial screening, future tests may involve only total and HDL cholesterol.
Total cholesterol and lipid panel tests may also be used to:
Monitor people with a high risk of cardiovascular disease
Diagnose certain medical conditions
Monitor how well treatment is working to reduce cardiovascular disease risk
What does the test measure?
The total cholesterol test measures the combined sum of all cholesterol molecules found in the blood. This test alone does not specify the breakdown of different types of cholesterol; however, it is often combined with other tests that include measurements of HDL, LDL, and triglycerides.
When should I get a cholesterol test?
There are no consensus guidelines for when to do cholesterol screening. Based on different views of the benefits and downsides of screening, expert groups have varying recommendations for when to start screening and how frequently to do repeat tests.
As a general guideline, diagnostic testing typically begins with routine blood testing as an adult, usually around 35 years old. However, it is a good idea to consult with your doctor to determine whether or not you are at greater risk of high cholesterol. But there are certain factors that may put you at high risk, including:
Being over 45 years old for men and over 50-55 for women
High cholesterol on a previous test
Prior cardiovascular problems
Being overweight or obese
Cigarette smoking
Unhealthy diet
Lack of regular physical activity
High blood pressure (hypertension)
Having a first-degree relative who had heart disease at an early age (under 55 in men and under 65 in women)
Diabetes or prediabetes
There are no telltale symptoms of high cholesterol which present themselves prior to a catastrophic health event such as a heart attack or stroke, which makes getting tested incredibly important. Depending on your risk factors and ongoing test results, you may have cholesterol tests every year or less.
For people who have already had cardiovascular problems, cholesterol tests can be used to monitor their heart health and see how well treatment is working to lower their cholesterol.
A summary reviewing general approaches to cholesterol screening is listed below. In the majority of cases, screening is done with a lipid test that measures total cholesterol as well as HDL, LDL, and triglycerides.
Receiving test results
If your cholesterol is being analyzed by a laboratory after a needle blood draw, you can expect to receive results within a few days. The doctor’s office may contact you with results or schedule an appointment to review them. You may also receive results through an online health portal or in the mail.
For point-of-care tests or at-home test kits with a device for analyzing cholesterol, results are available within minutes.
Interpreting test results
Cholesterol levels are measured in milligrams per deciliter of blood (mg/dL). General reference ranges for total cholesterol are listed below:
Normal:under 200 mg/dL
Normal:
Borderline high:200-239 mg/dL
Borderline high:
High:240 mg/dL and above
High:
Remember that total cholesterol alone does not offer a complete picture of your risk for cardiovascular problems. The amounts of good (HDL) and bad (LDL) cholesterol are important to consider, which is why these are evaluated as part of a complete lipid panel.
Cholesterol test results are also not the only factor determining your heart health. Your age, family history, and health habits are elements that affect your cardiovascular disease risk. Using a risk calculator, your doctor may analyze your test scores alongside these other factors.
Depending on your test scores and overall risk, treatment may be suggested to lower your cholesterol. Examples of treatment include lifestyle changes, such as increase to exercise, quitting smoking or changing your diet, as well as medications that help decrease cholesterol. Your doctor can best discuss the benefits and risks of these approaches in your situation, but be sure to ask follow-up questions, such as:
What lifestyle changes do I need to make?
How often should I check my cholesterol?
Do cholesterol medications have any side effects?
How do I know the medication is working?
What happens if this treatment plan doesn’t improve my cholesterol—what’s next?
While the main focus of cholesterol testing is on identifying cases of high cholesterol, it is also possible to have very low levels. This is most often tied to an underlying health condition or malnutrition.

Triglycerides Testing
Purpose of the test
Blood tests for triglycerides are usually part of alipid panelthat is used to help identify your risk of developing heart disease and to help make decisions about what treatment may be needed if there is borderline or high risk.
As part of a lipid panel, a triglycerides test may be used to monitor people who have risk factors for heart disease, those who have had a heart attack, or those who are being treated for high lipid and/or high triglycerides levels.
Results of thecholesterol testand other components of the lipid panel are used along with other known risk factors of heart disease to develop a plan of treatment and follow-up. Treatment options may include lifestyle changes, such as diet or exercise programs, or lipid-lowering drugs, such as statins.
What does the test measure?
Most triglycerides are found in fat (adipose) tissue, but some triglycerides circulate in the blood to provide fuel for muscles to work. After a person eats, an increased level of triglycerides is found in the blood as the body converts the energy not needed right away into fat.
Triglycerides move via the blood from the gut to adipose tissue for storage. In between meals, triglycerides are released from fat tissue to be used as an energy source for the body. Most triglycerides are carried in the blood by lipoproteins calledvery low-density lipoproteins (VLDL).
High levels of triglycerides in the blood are associated with an increased risk of developing cardiovascular disease (CVD), although the reason for this is not well understood. Certain factors can contribute to high triglycerides levels and to an increased risk of CVD, including lack of exercise, being overweight, smoking cigarettes, consuming excess alcohol, and having medical conditions such as diabetes and kidney disease.
When should I get a triglycerides test?
Adults
Adults
A lipid panel, which includes triglycerides, is recommended every 4 to 6 years to evaluate risk of heart disease in healthy adults. Children should have a lipid panel screening at least once between the ages of 9 and 11 and once again between the ages of 17 and 21.
Testing may be ordered more frequently when people have identified risk factors for heart disease. Some risk factors for heart disease include:
Cigarette smoking
Being overweight or obese
Unhealthy diet
Being physically inactive—or not getting enough exercise
Age (men 45 years or older or women 55 years or older)
High blood pressure (hypertension—blood pressure of 140/90 or higher or taking high blood pressure medication)
Family history of premature heart disease (heart disease in an immediate family member—male relative under age 55 or female relative under age 65)
Pre-existing heart disease or already having had a heart attack
Diabetes or prediabetes
For diabetics, it is especially important to have triglycerides measured as part of any lipid testing since triglycerides increase significantly whenblood glucose levelsare not well-controlled.
Youth
Youth
Screening forhigh cholesterolas part of a lipid panel is recommended for children and young adults. They should be tested once between the ages of 9 and 11 and then again between the ages of 17 and 21. Earlier and more frequent screening with a lipid panel is recommended for children and youths who are at an increased risk of developing heart disease as adults. Some of the risk factors are similar to those in adults and include a family history of heart disease or health problems such as diabetes, high blood pressure, or being overweight.
High-risk children should have their first cholesterol test between 2 and 8 years old, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics. Children younger than 2 years old are too young to be tested.
Monitoring
Monitoring
As part of a lipid panel, triglycerides tests may be ordered at regular intervals to evaluate the success of lipid-lowering lifestyle changes, such as diet and exercise, or to determine the effectiveness of drug therapy such as statins.
Guidelines from the American College of Cardiology and the American Heart Association recommend that adults taking statins have a fasting lipid panel done four to 12 weeks after starting therapy and then every three to 12 months thereafter to assure that the drug is working.
Receiving test results
It can take anywhere from a few hours to a few days to receive the results of a triglycerides test. Your results will be sent directly to you or your doctor, and may also be available through an online health portal.
You can ask the doctor who ordered your test for more details about how and when you will receive the results.
Interpreting test results
In general, healthy lipid levels help to maintain a healthy heart and lower the risk of heart attack or stroke. A health care practitioner will take into consideration the results of each component of the lipid panel as well as other risk factors to help determine your overall risk ofheart disease, whether treatment is necessary and, if so, which treatment will best help to lower your risk.
In 2002, the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) Adult Treatment Panel III (ATPIII) provided the guidelines for evaluating lipid levels and determining treatment. In 2013, the American College of Cardiology and the American Heart Association issued guidelines for adults that made recommendations on who should receive cholesterol-lowering therapy.
However, use of the updated guidelines remains controversial. Many still use the older guidelines from the NCEP ATP III to evaluate lipid levels and cardiovascular disease risk:
For adults, triglycerides test results are categorized as follows:
For adults
Desirable: Less than 150 mg/dL (1.7 mmol/L)
Borderline high: 150 to 199 mg/dL (1.7-2.2 mmol/L)
High: 200 to 499 mg/dL (2.3-5.6 mmol/L)
Very high: Greater than 500 mg/dL (5.6 mmol/L)
For children, teens and young adults:
For children, teens and young adults:
From newborn to age 9
Acceptable: Less than 75 mg/dL (0.85 mmol/L)
Borderline high: 75-99 mg/dL (0.85-1.12 mmol/L)
High: Greater than 100 mg/dL (1.13 mmol/L)
For ages 10-19 years
Acceptable: Less than 90 mg/dL (1.02 mmol/L)
Borderline high: 90-129 mg/dL (1.02-1.46 mmol/L)
High: Greater than 130 mg/dL (1.47 mmol/L)
For young adults older than 19
Acceptable: Less than 115 mg/dL (1.30 mmol/L)
Borderline high: 115-149 mg/dL (1.30-1.68 mmol/L)
High: Greater than 150 mg/dL (1.7 mmol/L)
Note: These values are based on fasting triglycerides levels.
When triglycerides are very high (greater than 1000 mg/dL (11.30 mmol/L)), there is a risk of developing pancreatitis in children and adults. Treatment to lower triglycerides should be started as soon as possible.
It’s good to discuss your results with your doctor. Some questions you may want to ask include:
What do my results indicate about my health?
Were the results from the test abnormal? If so, how should I address the abnormality?
Are there any diagnoses to be made based on my results?
Will any follow up tests be needed based on my results?
Given results, is there anything that you would suggest I do to improve my health?

HDL Cholesterol Testing


Table:
Demographic Group | Risk Factors | Screening Frequency
Children | No risk factors | Once between ages 9-11; again between 17-21
Children | One or more | Every 1-3 years starting when risk factor is identified
Adolescents and Adults of Any Age | One or more | At least every 5 years; often more frequently based on specific risk factors
Males Age 20-45Females Age 20-55 | No risk factors | Every 4-6 years
Males Age 45-65Females Age 55-65 | No risk factors | Every 1-2 years
People Over 65 | With or without risk factors | Annually

Purpose of the test
The purpose of HDL-C testing is to assess your cardiovascular health, including your risk for heart disease. HDL-C is considered to be a good type of cholesterol that is associated with a lower risk of coronary heart disease events.
Measuring HDL-C and total cholesterol together in the same blood sample allows the doctor to easily calculate the ratio of HDL-C to non-HDL cholesterol. This is important for assessing your cardiovascular health and allows the doctor to understand the relative amounts of good and bad cholesterols.
Testing HDL-C can play a role in screening, monitoring, and diagnosing problems that affect your heart, blood vessels, and blood circulation.
Screening
Screening is looking for health problems before any symptoms have occurred. The goal of cardiovascular screening is to better address problems by finding them at an earlier stage.
Screening is one of the most common ways that HDL-C testing is used. In both children and adults who do not have symptoms of cardiovascular problems, cholesterol levels may be checked periodically.
A low level of HDL-C has been tied to an elevated risk of problems like heart disease and stroke. It is also associated with type 2 diabetes. For this reason, HDL-C testing can be used for the early detection of potentially serious health concerns.
Based on an analysis of blood levels of total cholesterol, HDL-C, and LDL cholesterol, doctors can use special formulas to determine whether a patient’s risk level is borderline, intermediate, or high.
Monitoring
In many cases, it is necessary to track cholesterol levels over time. This is known as monitoring, and it is typical for HDL-C to be tested at set intervals. The most common situations in which HDL-C is monitored over time include:
After a prior abnormal cholesterol test:If you have had a previous cholesterol test with low HDL-C or high LDL cholesterol, you may have ongoing testing to monitor your lipid levels.
After a prior abnormal cholesterol test:
After a prior cardiovascular problem:If you have been diagnosed with heart disease or have had a heart attack in the past, cholesterol testing can be part of monitoring your health over time.
After a prior cardiovascular problem:
After starting treatment to reduce cardiovascular risk:Sometimes doctors will recommend lifestyle changes or medications to improve your cholesterol levels, and ongoing testing can assess your response to the prescribed treatment.
After starting treatment to reduce cardiovascular risk:
Diagnosis
Less often, HDL cholesterol tests are for diagnosis, which is identifying the cause of a health problem after symptoms have started.
Doctors may order cholesterol tests if you have certain cardiovascular symptoms. HDL-C levels are a consideration in the diagnosis of metabolic syndrome, a set of risk factors for diabetes, stroke, and coronary heart disease. Cholesterol testing can also be involved in identifying some health problems affecting other organs.
What does the test measure?
An HDL-C test analyzes a sample of blood to see how much cholesterol is present within HDL particles. Cholesterol, a waxy substance important for basic cell function such as the formation of cell membranes and certain hormones, is transported through the body in the blood within lipoproteins made up of fat and protein.
There are multiple kinds of lipoproteins that can carry cholesterol including HDL, LDL, and very low-density lipoproteins (VLDL).
Cholesterol in LDL and VLDL particles can build up in the arteries and cause cardiovascular problems. In contrast, HDL particles transport cholesterol to the liver so that it can be eliminated from the body. Through this and other functions, HDL-C helps protect against hardening and blockages of the arteries.
In practice, virtually all HDL-C tests also measure total cholesterol in addition, which is the sum of cholesterol found in all the different kinds of lipoproteins. By subtracting HDL-C from total cholesterol, the doctor can determine the amount of non-HDL cholesterol that is present. In addition, tests like a lipid panel may use a mathematical formula to calculate the amount of LDL cholesterol in your blood sample.
When should I get this test?
Whether an HDL-C test is appropriate depends on your specific circumstances.
As a screening test, there are no universally agreed-upon recommendations regarding how often to measure cholesterol levels. In general, screening is started earlier if you have risk factors such as high blood pressure, cigarette smoking, diabetes, or a family history of heart disease at an earlier age. Ongoing cholesterol testing may occur more often if you have one or more of these risk factors.
People without an elevated risk for cardiovascular problems usually start screening at a later age and often have longer intervals between cholesterol tests.
It is best if you talk with your doctor about the most appropriate screening plan for your specific situation. An overview of common recommendations for cholesterol screening is listed in the table below:
Females Age 20-55
Females Age 55-65
Screening is frequently done with a lipid panel, especially for an initial test. However, some screening may be done with only total cholesterol and HDL-C measurement.
When used to monitor cholesterol over time, HDL-C testing may be recommended if you have already been diagnosed with coronary heart disease.
Tracking cholesterol levels can also be important if you have had cardiovascular problems or abnormal cholesterol levels in the past. If you are receiving treatment for these issues, repeated HDL-C testing may be used to monitor your response to therapy.
Although principally used to detect cardiovascular issues, abnormalities in HDL-C can occur with other health problems affecting the thyroid, pancreas, or liver. As a result, cholesterol testing may be involved in the diagnostic process for a range of medical conditions.
Receiving test results
After the blood draw, results from an HDL-C test are typically ready within a few days. A full test report is usually sent to you either electronically or by mail. Your physician may also contact you to discuss your results.
Point-of-care tests with a fingerstick are generally able to deliver results within minutes. Results for these tests are often displayed visually on the test strip or device.
At-home tests that involve sending a blood sample to a laboratory will take longer as the sample must be mailed to the lab and then analyzed.
Interpreting test results
HDL-C is generally measured and reported in milligrams per deciliter of blood (mg/dL). Your test report will show your HDL-C level as well as the reference range for normal or desirable HDL-C levels.
Several factors are involved in the interpretation of your HDL-C test, including:
Your age
Your sex
Your health history and cardiovascular risk factors
Your total cholesterol and other lipid levels
Since HDL-C is known as “good cholesterol,” a higher level is better, and HDL-C above 60 mg/dL is generally considered to be excellent.
For most people, an HDL-C level that is above 60 mg/dL is associated with reduced cardiovascular risk. However, high HDL-C can occur because of some medications, alcohol abuse, or thyroid problems. High HDL-C can also occur in some inherited conditions. In these less common cases, high HDL-C may not be beneficial.
HDL-C levels that are under 40 mg/dL are considered to be low, although some organizations consider levels under 50 mg/dL in females to be low.
Low HDL-C is a risk factor for cardiovascular problems including serious conditions like heart disease and stroke. Also, low HDL-C can be a reflection of an underlying condition like diabetes. The health risks of low HDL-C can be increased when it occurs in conjunction with other abnormal cholesterol levels, such as high levels of “bad” LDL cholesterol, or with issues like high blood pressure.
Other things that can cause low HDL-C levels include specific inherited conditions, certain medications, some infections, and many medical conditions that cause inflammation.
HDL-C is an important measurement, but it is rarely evaluated alone. By considering HDL-C along with other factors, including levels of LDL cholesterol and other aspects of your overall health, your doctor can better assess your cardiovascular risk.
As a result, it is essential to discuss the results of an HDL-C test with your doctor because they are in the best position to explain what the results mean for your health.
Whether you will need follow-up tests depends on the results of your HDL-C test.
If you have no risk factors for cardiovascular problems and have healthy levels of HDL and non-HDL cholesterol, you typically do not need any immediate follow-up testing. However, your doctor may recommend repeated cholesterol screening every few years.
If you have low HDL-C or other cardiovascular risk factors, you may need follow-up tests. These could include repeated or expanded cholesterol tests, and/or cardiac stress tests.
If you have an abnormal result on a point-of-care or at-home test, it is normal to have a follow-up cholesterol test with a blood draw so that your blood can be analyzed by a laboratory.
Talking with your doctor can provide the most detailed information about your HDL-C test results. Some of the following questions may be useful in obtaining detailed explanations from your physician:
What was my HDL-C level? Is that level healthy for me?
Were any other types of cholesterol measured? If so, what were the results of those measurements?
Do I have risk factors for cardiovascular disease?
Should I have another cholesterol test? If so, when?
Are there any other tests that you recommend to evaluate my cardiovascular health?
Do you recommend any lifestyle changes or treatments to reduce my risk of cardiovascular disease?

LDL Cholesterol Blood Test (LDL-C)


Table:
DEMOGRAPHIC GROUP | RISK FACTORS | SCREENING FREQUENCY
Children | No risk factors | Once between ages 9-11; again between 17-21 years old
Children | One or more | Every 1-3 years starting when the risk factor is identified
Adolescents and adults of any age | One or more | At least every 5 years; often more frequently based on specific risk factors
Males ages 20-45 yearsFemales ages 20-55 years | No risk factors | Every 4-6 years
Males ages 45-65 yearsFemales ages 55-65 years | No risk factors | Every 1-2 years
People over 65 years | With or without risk factors | Annually

Purpose of the test
LDL cholesterol testing measures the amount of LDL cholesterol in your blood. Because LDL levels can provide information about cardiovascular health, they may be measured as part of diagnosis, screening, or monitoring.
Diagnosis:An LDL cholesterol test may be used to diagnose high cholesterol in your blood.
Diagnosis:
Screening:Screening means testing LDL cholesterol levels before any symptoms occur. Because health issues can occur when cholesterol levels are too high, doctors may check your LDL cholesterol levels to get a baseline measurement. Your doctor can compare future measurements to this one to get an idea of your cholesterol trends.
Screening:
Monitoring:Monitoring your cholesterol levels at regular intervals over time enables doctors to notice any changes and to see if treatment for conditions, like heart disease or high cholesterol, are working.
Monitoring:
What does the test measure?
An LDL cholesterol test checks the amount of LDL cholesterol in the blood. Results are typically measured in milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL).
Cholesterol is a fatty substance your body naturally creates to help in digesting food, creating hormones, and cell membranes. The substance is made up of different types of lipoproteins, which are a combination of fats, also known as lipids, and proteins. Lipids connect to proteins to be able to move through your blood. Cholesterol testing often measures different substances in the blood:
High-density (HDL) cholesterol:This carries cholesterol from other parts of your body to your liver for processing and removal and is considered the “good” cholesterol.
High-density (HDL) cholesterol:
LDL cholesterol:This is known as the “bad” cholesterol because too much of it in your blood can lead to a buildup of plaque in your arteries, putting you at risk of heart disease, diabetes, or stroke.
LDL cholesterol:
Triglycerides:These are fats created by the foods we eat, stored until your body needs energy. Triglycerides are processed by your body when it needs energy. Having high levels of triglycerides can lead to coronary heart disease and other cardiovascular issues.
Triglycerides:
Very low-density (VLDL) cholesterol:VLDL is similar to LDL cholesterol but carries triglycerides through the blood. VLDL can contribute to plaque buildup and is considered a “bad” cholesterol.
Very low-density (VLDL) cholesterol:
Knowing about these different components of cholesterol testing is important to understanding the options for checking your LDL level. These levels can be estimated based on the number of other types of cholesterol in the blood or can be measured directly:
Calculated LDL cholesterol testing:In this test, total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and triglycerides are used to estimate LDL cholesterol levels in your blood. Usually, LDL is calculated by subtracting the amount of HDL and VLDL from the total amount of cholesterol. In most cases, LDL cholesterol levels reported by your doctor are calculated rather than measured directly.
Calculated LDL cholesterol testing:
Direct LDL cholesterol testing:Tests that measure only LDL cholesterol levels in your blood are called direct LDL cholesterol tests. Your doctor might use a direct LDL cholesterol test if you have a high level of triglycerides, which can make the formula-based calculation of LDL less accurate.
Direct LDL cholesterol testing:
Most of the time, using a formula to calculate LDL cholesterol is accurate enough to provide your doctor with a useful assessment of your cholesterol levels.
When should I get an LDL cholesterol test?
LDL cholesterol testing may be used to assess your risk of cardiovascular disease or monitor changes in cholesterol over time.
Doctors will take factors such as age, family history, and other medical conditions when determining how often you should check your levels of LDL cholesterol. Examples of common screening recommendations are outlined below:
DEMOGRAPHIC GROUP
RISK FACTORS
SCREENING FREQUENCY
Females ages 20-55 years
Females ages 55-65 years
Having your cholesterol levels checked at regular intervals gives doctors a chance to notice any changes that could become harmful to your health. High or increasing cholesterol levels are a risk factor for heart disease, diabetes, or stroke, among other conditions.
Doctors may want to test your cholesterol levels more regularly if you or your family have a history of heart disease, smoking, high blood pressure, type 2 diabetes, obesity, a sedentary lifestyle, or a diet high in saturated fat.


Table:
LDL CHOLESTEROL LEVEL | LDL CHOLESTEROL CATEGORY
Less than 100 mg/dL | Optimal
100-129 mg/dL | Near optimal
130-159 mg/dL | Borderline high
160-189 mg/dL | High
190 mg/dL and above | Very high

Receiving test results
When a blood test is performed at a health care facility as part of a lipid panel or direct LDL measurement, results are usually sent back from the lab within a few days. Your doctor may share your results with you through an online health portal or in the mail. They may want to schedule a follow-up visit to discuss your results or potential next steps.
Interpreting test results
LDL cholesterol levels are most commonly measured in mg/dL. Because high levels of LDL can indicate a greater risk of heart disease and stroke, a low amount of LDL cholesterol is preferred. LDL cholesterol levels are categorized into the following segments:
LDL CHOLESTEROL LEVEL
LDL CHOLESTEROL CATEGORY
LDL levels are not interpreted alone but rather as part of your overall health. Accordingly, LDL cholesterol results ranging between 70 mg/dL and 189 mg/dL can be considered too high if you have diabetes, heart disease, a history of a stroke, poor circulation to your legs, or other conditions.
Your doctor can best help you understand what your specific test results mean for your health. Some doctors may set a specific target level when prescribing medication to lower cholesterol. Factors like diet, age, smoking, physical activity, weight, sex, genetics, medicines, and other medical conditions can all affect your LDL cholesterol level.
Continued cholesterol monitoring, increased physical activity, changed dietary habits, and medication may all be recommended to lower LDL cholesterol levels. Reducing LDL cholesterol may help decrease your risk of heart disease, stroke, or other cardiovascular conditions.
Cholesterol testing is done at regular intervals to track changes in your cholesterol levels over time. Repeat testing at regular intervals will be necessary if you have high LDL cholesterol levels, risk factors for heart disease or diabetes, or if you’re being treated for high cholesterol.
If you have had a calculated LDL cholesterol test that found high triglyceride levels, doctors may order a direct LDL cholesterol test.
After taking a test, you may wish to discuss the results with your physician. Here are some questions you can ask:
What are my LDL cholesterol levels?
Do you consider my LDL level to be too high?
What should my LDL cholesterol level be?
How can I lower my LDL cholesterol level?
Will I need a prescription to lower my cholesterol?
How often will we check my cholesterol levels?

Non-High Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol Testing


Table:
DEMOGRAPHIC GROUP | RISK FACTORS | SCREENING FREQUENCY
Children | No risk factors | Once between ages 9-11; again between ages 17-21
Children | One or more risk factors | Every 1-3 years starting when the risk factor is identified
Adolescents and adults of any age | One or more risk factors | At least every 5 years; often more frequently based on specific risk factors
Males ages 20-45Females ages 20-55 | No risk factors | Every 4-6 years
Males ages 45-65Females ages 55-65 | No risk factors | Every 1-2 years
People over age 65 | With or without risk factors | Annually

Purpose of the test
The purpose of a non-HDL cholesterol test is to determine the amount of “bad” cholesterol in the blood. This common way of assessing cardiovascular health is done by first measuring total cholesterol and subtracting HDL cholesterol. Non-HDL cholesterol tests can be used for diagnosis, screening, and monitoring  .
Diagnosisis identifying the cause of a health problem after symptoms have started. Tests that measure cholesterol, including non-HDL cholesterol, may be part of the evaluation of patients with symptoms that are consistent with cardiovascular disease. Cholesterol may also be tested to diagnose some conditions affecting the liver, pancreas, or thyroid.
Diagnosis
Screeningis checking for a health problem before there are any symptoms. Periodic cholesterol testing is often done to identify children and adults who have high levels of non-HDL cholesterol, which is associated with an elevated risk of cardiovascular problems like heart disease, heart attack, and stroke.
Screening
Monitoringis testing done to see how a patient’s condition has changed, including in response to treatment. If you have had abnormal cholesterol levels in the past or have been diagnosed with a cardiovascular disease you may be monitored with repeated cholesterol tests over time.
Monitoring
What does the test measure?
A non-HDL cholesterol test involves at least three components:
Total cholesterol:This is a measurement of the sum of all cholesterol in a sample of blood.
Total cholesterol:
HDL cholesterol:This is a direct measurement of “good” cholesterol that is found in HDLs. Lipoproteins are particles made up of protein and fat that carry cholesterol in the blood.
HDL cholesterol:
Non-HDL cholesterol:This is a simple calculation made by subtracting the measured amount of HDL cholesterol from the measured amount of total cholesterol.
Non-HDL cholesterol:
Non-HDL cholesterol includes multiple different cholesterol containing lipoproteins that can build up in the arteries and increase the risk of serious health problems. Specifically, non-HDL cholesterol encompasseslow-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol,very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) cholesterol, intermediate-density lipoprotein (IDL) cholesterol, andlipoprotein(a).
When should I get a non-HDL cholesterol test?
Cholesterol testing can be ordered in many different circumstances. Whether testing is appropriate for you depends on your specific situation.
There are no strict guidelines for when to perform health screenings that include cholesterol testing. The age at which to start screening and how frequently screening is repeated may depend on whether you have risk factors for cardiovascular disease. Examples of risk factors include:
High blood pressure
Diabetes
Cigarette smoking
A family history of heart disease that occurs at an early age
Your doctor can review your risk factors and describe the optimal schedule for screening in your case. Although not all experts agree on the best schedule for cholesterol screening, many health professionals follow recommendations similar to those described in the table below:
DEMOGRAPHIC GROUP
RISK FACTORS
SCREENING FREQUENCY
Females ages 20-55
Females ages 55-65
Screening generally involves measuring at least total cholesterol and HDL cholesterol, which allows non-HDL cholesterol to be calculated. In many cases, a fulllipid panelis used for screening, which shows an estimated level of LDL cholesterol along with total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and another fat-like substance called triglycerides.
As a method of monitoring cardiovascular health, cholesterol tests are most frequently used if:
You have previously been diagnosed with heart disease or another cardiovascular problem
You have had abnormal cholesterol levels in the past, such as elevated non-HDL cholesterol
You are making lifestyle changes and/or taking medications as a form of treatment to improve your cardiovascular health
While less often used for diagnosis, cholesterol testing might be included in the diagnostic process if you have symptoms that may be related to problems affecting the liver, thyroid, pancreas, or cardiovascular system.
Because cholesterol testing is prescribed according to many individual factors, your doctor is in the best position to address when you should have a cholesterol test that assesses non-HDL cholesterol.
Receiving test results
Results from a laboratory cholesterol test with a needle blood draw are most often available within a few business days. You will normally be provided with a test report sent by mail or accessible through an electronic health portal. Your doctor may also call you or schedule an appointment to review the results.
Point-of-care tests provide rapid results, so if you have a fingerstick test, you will generally have results within a few minutes. The doctor or nurse who conducts the test may show you the result and/or review it with you.
Interpreting test results
Non-HDL cholesterol is usually listed in milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) of blood or in millimole per liter (mmol/L). A cholesterol test report will show a separate line for each type of cholesterol that was assessed including total, HDL, and non-HDL cholesterol.
While some cholesterol test reports may not specifically list non-HDL cholesterol, the doctor can quickly calculate it by subtracting measured HDL cholesterol from total cholesterol. In some cases, the laboratory or your doctor may also calculate a ratio of total cholesterol to HDL cholesterol.
In addition to showing your levels, the test report will list the reference ranges for each type of cholesterol. This is important because it demonstrates what levels are considered to be normal for analyses done by that specific laboratory.
There is no single reference range for non-HDL cholesterol that is used for all people. Instead, interpretation of non-HDL cholesterol tests accounts for factors such as:
Your sex
Your age
Your health history and overall health
Your family health history, including relatives with cardiovascular disease
Your lifestyle factors that can affect heart health, such as smoking
A review of these factors along with your cholesterol levels can help a doctor assess your risk of cardiovascular problems like coronary heart disease. Elevated levels of non-HDL cholesterol are associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease.
There are some factors that can affect the non-HDL cholesterol test results, including:
Active illness:A current infection or illness may influence blood cholesterol levels.
Active illness:
Variability among individuals and labs:Stress and other individual factors may contribute to slight changes in cholesterol test results. In addition, different laboratory methods can return small variations in cholesterol levels from lab to lab.
Variability among individuals and labs:
Some blood disorders:Although uncommon, certain blood disorders can cause HDL levels to be lower than they actually are. This can impact the calculation of non-HDL cholesterol.
Some blood disorders:
The best way to understand the significance of a cholesterol test is to discuss the result with a doctor. A doctor can review your levels of different types of cholesterol and address what those levels mean for your health. When appropriate, the doctor can also suggest specific steps to try to reduce your risk of cardiovascular disease. You may want to ask one or more of the following questions to your doctor:
What kinds of cholesterol were measured on my test?
Which, if any, cholesterol levels were abnormal?
What other factors do you consider when determining my cardiovascular disease risk?
Do you recommend any follow-up testing?
Based on my non-HDL cholesterol levels, should I make any lifestyle changes or begin any treatment to improve my cardiovascular health?

Bilirubin Test
Purpose of the test
Doctors often order a bilirubin test along with other tests performed on a single blood or urine sample, such as in acomprehensive metabolic panel, aliver panel, or aurinalysis.
Testing bilirubin in the blood and urine can help doctors diagnose problems such as jaundice, a condition that may cause your eyes and skin to turn yellow, as well ashepatitis,cirrhosis, gallbladder disease, andhemolytic anemia.
Bilirubin blood testing is also used to diagnose newborn jaundice, which can lead to kernicterus at very high bilirubin levels. Prolonged and very high bilirubin levels can lead to complications if left untreated, so testing is commonly performed in newborns during their first few days of life and when signs of jaundice appear.
Repeated bilirubin testing can help a doctor monitor the disease’s status and how you respond to treatment if you have been diagnosed with a liver disorder.
What does the test measure?
Thebilirubin blood testmeasures the amount of bilirubin in the blood. Results are commonly expressed as mg/dL, or milligrams of bilirubin per deciliter of blood (serum or plasma).
bilirubin blood test
Bilirubin mainly exists in two forms in the blood. Initially, bilirubin is “unconjugated” and water-insoluble. Unconjugated bilirubin is attached to albumin, the main protein in blood that carries substances to the liver.
In the liver, bilirubin undergoes a process called conjugation with a substance called glucuronide; bilirubin becomes water-soluble and ready to be excreted into the bile.
A total blood test includes unconjugated and conjugated bilirubin. Due to the uniqueness of the analytical measurement of bilirubin, unconjugated bilirubin may also be called indirect bilirubin (total bilirubin minus direct bilirubin). At the same time, conjugated bilirubin may be referred to as direct bilirubin (directly measured).
Another less common measurement, delta bilirubin, is only formed when the excretion of conjugated bilirubin by the liver is impaired, like when a patient suffers from a bile duct obstruction. This type of conjugated bilirubin is linked to albumin and may persist for a prolonged period in your blood.
Neonatal bilirubin is commonly assessed in newborns and refers to the marked elevation of total bilirubin, mainly due to the increase in unconjugated bilirubin. Typically, a newborn’s liver needs a few days to take over the clearance of the bilirubin by conjugating bilirubin. This leads to increased bilirubin levels, gradually reaching normal levels about one week after birth.
Theurinary bilirubin testmeasures whether or not bilirubin is present in the urine. For bilirubin to be present in urine, it has to be conjugated and water-soluble. If there is bilirubin present, urine may become tea or cola-colored.
urinary bilirubin test
Receiving test results
A blood sample taken to measure bilirubin must be sent to a lab for analysis. It may take several days from giving your blood sample to receiving your test results.
A urine sample may be analyzed in your doctor’s office and/or sent to a laboratory for analysis. Your doctor will tell you when to expect the results of your urinary bilirubin test.
Interpreting test results
Bilirubin blood test results may indicate the total level in your blood. Some results may also list conjugated (direct) or unconjugated (indirect) bilirubin levels. These two levels typically add up to the total bilirubin level.
Your test results will also include reference ranges, the normal range of bilirubin levels. Results that fall outside the reference range, especially those above the upper normal level, may indicate the presence of disease or a need for further testing.
Reference ranges may vary depending on the lab that analyzes your blood sample and sends your results. The American Board of Internal Medicine uses the following reference ranges for adults:
Total bilirubin: 0.3–1.0 mg/dL
Direct bilirubin: 0.1–0.3 mg/dL
Indirect bilirubin: 0.2–0.7 mg/dL
But these ranges are not universal. ​​It is important to discuss your results with your health care provider, who will be in the best position to interpret what your results mean in the context of your overall health.
Infants commonly have higher bilirubin levels in the blood after birth as their livers continue to develop. As such, bilirubin testing is standard for all infants in their first 48 hours and is also often performed as a precautionary measure to monitor the change in these levels. If you are concerned about your baby’s bilirubin levels or if they are showing signs of jaundice, it is important to talk with your pediatrician.
A urinary bilirubin test result will either indicate a positive result, meaning it was detected in the urine (known as bilirubinuria), or a negative result, meaning bilirubin was not detected. If you are healthy with normal liver function, you should not have bilirubin in your urine.
Having a conversation with your doctor after you receive your results can help you understand what they mean and learn about the next steps for your care. You may find it helpful to ask these questions:
What were the results of my bilirubin test? Are they normal or abnormal?
Were any other measurements taken? What were the results?
What do these tests tell us about my overall health?
Do I need any follow-up tests?

LDL Cholesterol Blood Test (LDL-C)


Table:
DEMOGRAPHIC GROUP | RISK FACTORS | SCREENING FREQUENCY
Children | No risk factors | Once between ages 9-11; again between 17-21 years old
Children | One or more | Every 1-3 years starting when the risk factor is identified
Adolescents and adults of any age | One or more | At least every 5 years; often more frequently based on specific risk factors
Males ages 20-45 yearsFemales ages 20-55 years | No risk factors | Every 4-6 years
Males ages 45-65 yearsFemales ages 55-65 years | No risk factors | Every 1-2 years
People over 65 years | With or without risk factors | Annually

Purpose of the test
LDL cholesterol testing measures the amount of LDL cholesterol in your blood. Because LDL levels can provide information about cardiovascular health, they may be measured as part of diagnosis, screening, or monitoring.
Diagnosis:An LDL cholesterol test may be used to diagnose high cholesterol in your blood.
Diagnosis:
Screening:Screening means testing LDL cholesterol levels before any symptoms occur. Because health issues can occur when cholesterol levels are too high, doctors may check your LDL cholesterol levels to get a baseline measurement. Your doctor can compare future measurements to this one to get an idea of your cholesterol trends.
Screening:
Monitoring:Monitoring your cholesterol levels at regular intervals over time enables doctors to notice any changes and to see if treatment for conditions, like heart disease or high cholesterol, are working.
Monitoring:
What does the test measure?
An LDL cholesterol test checks the amount of LDL cholesterol in the blood. Results are typically measured in milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL).
Cholesterol is a fatty substance your body naturally creates to help in digesting food, creating hormones, and cell membranes. The substance is made up of different types of lipoproteins, which are a combination of fats, also known as lipids, and proteins. Lipids connect to proteins to be able to move through your blood. Cholesterol testing often measures different substances in the blood:
High-density (HDL) cholesterol:This carries cholesterol from other parts of your body to your liver for processing and removal and is considered the “good” cholesterol.
High-density (HDL) cholesterol:
LDL cholesterol:This is known as the “bad” cholesterol because too much of it in your blood can lead to a buildup of plaque in your arteries, putting you at risk of heart disease, diabetes, or stroke.
LDL cholesterol:
Triglycerides:These are fats created by the foods we eat, stored until your body needs energy. Triglycerides are processed by your body when it needs energy. Having high levels of triglycerides can lead to coronary heart disease and other cardiovascular issues.
Triglycerides:
Very low-density (VLDL) cholesterol:VLDL is similar to LDL cholesterol but carries triglycerides through the blood. VLDL can contribute to plaque buildup and is considered a “bad” cholesterol.
Very low-density (VLDL) cholesterol:
Knowing about these different components of cholesterol testing is important to understanding the options for checking your LDL level. These levels can be estimated based on the number of other types of cholesterol in the blood or can be measured directly:
Calculated LDL cholesterol testing:In this test, total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and triglycerides are used to estimate LDL cholesterol levels in your blood. Usually, LDL is calculated by subtracting the amount of HDL and VLDL from the total amount of cholesterol. In most cases, LDL cholesterol levels reported by your doctor are calculated rather than measured directly.
Calculated LDL cholesterol testing:
Direct LDL cholesterol testing:Tests that measure only LDL cholesterol levels in your blood are called direct LDL cholesterol tests. Your doctor might use a direct LDL cholesterol test if you have a high level of triglycerides, which can make the formula-based calculation of LDL less accurate.
Direct LDL cholesterol testing:
Most of the time, using a formula to calculate LDL cholesterol is accurate enough to provide your doctor with a useful assessment of your cholesterol levels.
When should I get an LDL cholesterol test?
LDL cholesterol testing may be used to assess your risk of cardiovascular disease or monitor changes in cholesterol over time.
Doctors will take factors such as age, family history, and other medical conditions when determining how often you should check your levels of LDL cholesterol. Examples of common screening recommendations are outlined below:
DEMOGRAPHIC GROUP
RISK FACTORS
SCREENING FREQUENCY
Females ages 20-55 years
Females ages 55-65 years
Having your cholesterol levels checked at regular intervals gives doctors a chance to notice any changes that could become harmful to your health. High or increasing cholesterol levels are a risk factor for heart disease, diabetes, or stroke, among other conditions.
Doctors may want to test your cholesterol levels more regularly if you or your family have a history of heart disease, smoking, high blood pressure, type 2 diabetes, obesity, a sedentary lifestyle, or a diet high in saturated fat.


Table:
LDL CHOLESTEROL LEVEL | LDL CHOLESTEROL CATEGORY
Less than 100 mg/dL | Optimal
100-129 mg/dL | Near optimal
130-159 mg/dL | Borderline high
160-189 mg/dL | High
190 mg/dL and above | Very high

Receiving test results
When a blood test is performed at a health care facility as part of a lipid panel or direct LDL measurement, results are usually sent back from the lab within a few days. Your doctor may share your results with you through an online health portal or in the mail. They may want to schedule a follow-up visit to discuss your results or potential next steps.
Interpreting test results
LDL cholesterol levels are most commonly measured in mg/dL. Because high levels of LDL can indicate a greater risk of heart disease and stroke, a low amount of LDL cholesterol is preferred. LDL cholesterol levels are categorized into the following segments:
LDL CHOLESTEROL LEVEL
LDL CHOLESTEROL CATEGORY
LDL levels are not interpreted alone but rather as part of your overall health. Accordingly, LDL cholesterol results ranging between 70 mg/dL and 189 mg/dL can be considered too high if you have diabetes, heart disease, a history of a stroke, poor circulation to your legs, or other conditions.
Your doctor can best help you understand what your specific test results mean for your health. Some doctors may set a specific target level when prescribing medication to lower cholesterol. Factors like diet, age, smoking, physical activity, weight, sex, genetics, medicines, and other medical conditions can all affect your LDL cholesterol level.
Continued cholesterol monitoring, increased physical activity, changed dietary habits, and medication may all be recommended to lower LDL cholesterol levels. Reducing LDL cholesterol may help decrease your risk of heart disease, stroke, or other cardiovascular conditions.
Cholesterol testing is done at regular intervals to track changes in your cholesterol levels over time. Repeat testing at regular intervals will be necessary if you have high LDL cholesterol levels, risk factors for heart disease or diabetes, or if you’re being treated for high cholesterol.
If you have had a calculated LDL cholesterol test that found high triglyceride levels, doctors may order a direct LDL cholesterol test.
After taking a test, you may wish to discuss the results with your physician. Here are some questions you can ask:
What are my LDL cholesterol levels?
Do you consider my LDL level to be too high?
What should my LDL cholesterol level be?
How can I lower my LDL cholesterol level?
Will I need a prescription to lower my cholesterol?
How often will we check my cholesterol levels?

At-Home Cholesterol Testing
Purpose of the test
Cholesterol testing can be a component of assessing cardiovascular disease risk. It is frequently prescribed by doctors, but it’s role as an at-home test is not clearly defined.
The following sections describe the distinct purposes of at-home and physician-ordered cholesterol tests.
The main purpose of at-home cholesterol tests is to gather information about the levels of cholesterol in your blood. Evidence is limited about what role, if any, at-home cholesterol testing can play in your health care.
At-home tests may detect high cholesterol levels that can be discussed with your doctor. However, at-home tests should never be used instead of doctor-prescribed tests or instead of discussing symptoms or cardiovascular risk factors with a health professional.
Most cholesterol testing is ordered by a doctor and performed in a medical office, hospital, or other medical setting. The purpose of cholesterol testing overseen by a health professional is better defined than at-home testing.
In many cases, a doctor recommends cholesterol testing for screening. This means that it is used to look for a health problem before any symptoms have occurred. Looking at cholesterol levels may provide an early warning sign of an increased risk of serious heart problems or cardiovascular disease.
Different medical organizations have distinct guidelines for using cholesterol testing for the early detection of cardiovascular risk. When to start screening and how often to repeat a cholesterol test typically depends on whether you have other risk factors such as high blood pressure, diabetes, cigarette smoking, or a family history of heart disease.
People with one or more risk factors usually start screening at a younger age and may have more frequent follow-up testing. Even people without risk factors are still usually advised to have occasional cholesterol testing. Your doctor can recommend a tailored screening schedule for your specific situation.
A doctor may order cholesterol testing to monitor the cardiovascular health of people who have had heart problems or abnormal cholesterol levels in the past. Periodically checking cholesterol levels can be used to assess changes to cardiovascular risk or an individual’s response to treatments meant to lower that risk.
More information about the uses of cholesterol testing and when they may be recommended can be found in our guides tototal cholesteroltests andlipid paneltests.
What does an at-home cholesterol test measure?
At-home cholesterol tests can measure the total amount of cholesterol in a blood sample and may also determine the levels of specific kinds of cholesterol.
Cholesterol and other fat-like substances are known as lipids. To travel through the blood, lipids must attach to particles called lipoproteins, which are made up of a mix of proteins and fat.
Cholesterol can attach to different kinds of lipoproteins, and this is a primary way of distinguishing between types of cholesterol. A lipid panel is a kind of cholesterol test that evaluates several types of lipids. The standard components of a lipid panel include:
Total cholesterol:Total cholesterolis the sum of all types of cholesterol found in a blood sample.
Total cholesterol:
High-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol:Also known as “good cholesterol,”HDL cholesterol(HDL-C) contributes to cardiovascular health in several ways, including by reducing the unwanted buildup of cholesterol in arteries.
High-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol:
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol:Commonly referred to as “bad cholesterol,”LDL cholesterol(LDL-C) is linked to cardiovascular problems like heart disease and stroke. In most cases, LDL-C is calculated using an equation based on the other measurements in a lipid panel.
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol:
Triglycerides:Triglycerides are another type of fat that have been associated with cardiovascular problems.
Triglycerides:
An at-home cholesterol test may involve some or all of these components. It is important to look closely at any at-home test to know exactly which cholesterol levels will be included in the test report.
When should I get an at-home cholesterol test?
You can consider getting an at-home test if you are curious about your blood cholesterol. This can provide information about your current cholesterol levels and may help initiate a more in-depth conversation with your doctor about heart health and wellness.
At the same time, you should not have an at-home cholesterol test if you have concerns or symptoms related to your health. In that case, you should talk with your doctor for specific guidance. Your doctor can also review the pros and cons of at-home cholesterol testing in your situation.
Results from at-home self-tests are usually immediate, and self-collection tests generally have results available within a few days. Cholesterol levels are reported in milligrams per deciliter of blood (mg/dL).
The exact results shown on your test will depend on which cholesterol levels were included in the test. Common target levels for different types of cholesterol include:
Total cholesterol:Under 200 mg/dL
Total cholesterol:
HDL (good) cholesterol:Above 60 mg/dL
HDL (good) cholesterol:
LDL (bad) cholesterol:Below 100 mg/dL
LDL (bad) cholesterol:
Triglycerides:Below 150 mg/dL
Triglycerides:
These numbers provide a general reference for target cholesterol levels, but targets for any individual can depend on their specific circumstances.
Total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, and/or triglycerides that are abnormally high are associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease. Low levels of HDL-C have also been tied to heart disease and other problems.
Cholesterol tests should always be interpreted with your overall health in mind. This means considering your age, sex, risk factors for cardiovascular problems, and health history. For this reason, it is best to discuss any cholesterol test results with a doctor who can best explain its significance in your case.
It is also important to remember that at-home testing may not use the same methods for measuring cholesterol that are used in tests ordered by your doctor. As a result, you should talk to your doctor before comparing the results of an at-home test with results from prior cholesterol tests.
Are test results accurate?
Cholesterol testing is common and generally dependable as part of cardiovascular risk assessment. Like any medical testing, though, cholesterol tests are not perfect.
When properly performed, at-home cholesterol self-tests can be about as accurate as laboratory lab tests conducted with a blood draw. However, products that are poorly manufactured or that provide inadequate instructions may suffer from reductions in accuracy.
For both in-lab and at-home cholesterol measurement, certain issues can influence the accuracy of the test:
Individual factors:Small fluctuations in cholesterol levels can be related to stress or your physical posture during the test.
Individual factors:
Active illness:Inflammation related to various types of illness can change cholesterol levels, affecting the short-term reliability of cholesterol measurements.
Active illness:
LDL-C calculations:Standard cholesterol testing usually calculates LDL-C levels based on the other measurements. The formulas for these calculations can lead to inaccurate results in people who have very high triglyceride levels.
LDL-C calculations:
For any questions about the accuracy of specific at-home tests, you can ask the test provider for available documentation related to the testing method and results accuracy. Your doctor can also discuss any factors in your case that could affect cholesterol test results.
Do I need follow-up tests?
Depending on your at-home cholesterol test results, you may need follow-up tests. If your at-home test shows abnormal cholesterol levels, your doctor may want to perform a laboratory assessment of your cholesterol levels using a sample taken during a blood draw.
In addition to repeat testing of your cholesterol levels, other tests may be considered based on your specific situation. These could include more detailed cholesterol tests like adirect LDL-C testor other types of expanded lipid analysis. In some cases, a cardiac stress test or other kinds of imaging tests may be used to assess heart health.
Questions for your doctor after at-home testing
After you have taken an at-home cholesterol test, you can review your results with your doctor and raise some of the following questions:
What are my target levels for different kinds of cholesterol?
Were any of my cholesterol levels abnormal?
How do the levels on my at-home test compare to any prior cholesterol tests in my health record?
Do you recommend any further cholesterol testing? If so, what tests should I take and how often should I take them?
Should I consider any treatments or lifestyle changes related to my cardiovascular health?

There are numerous types of cholesterol testing, and this can create confusion for people trying to understand what makes each test distinct. The following sections compare at-home and in-lab cholesterol tests and provide links to learn more about other related cholesterol tests.
Comparing and contrasting laboratory and at-home cholesterol testing
Whether conducted in a laboratory or at home, cholesterol tests rely on a blood sample. Virtually all tests measure total cholesterol, but the other components can vary depending on the specific test that is being taken. In addition, fasting may be required in some cases for both kinds of tests. In most cases, accuracy of at-home and in-lab tests is comparable.
A principal difference between these tests is how the blood sample is obtained. Blood drawn from a vein is usually analyzed in tests that are conducted at a doctor’s office, lab, or hospital. At-home self-tests and self-collection tests rely on a smaller amount of blood obtained with a fingerstick.
Another difference is insurance coverage. When a standard blood draw and cholesterol test is ordered by a doctor, some or all of the charges are often covered by insurance. In contrast, most at-home cholesterol tests are not covered, requiring you to pay the full cost out-of-pocket.

HDL Cholesterol Testing


Table:
Demographic Group | Risk Factors | Screening Frequency
Children | No risk factors | Once between ages 9-11; again between 17-21
Children | One or more | Every 1-3 years starting when risk factor is identified
Adolescents and Adults of Any Age | One or more | At least every 5 years; often more frequently based on specific risk factors
Males Age 20-45Females Age 20-55 | No risk factors | Every 4-6 years
Males Age 45-65Females Age 55-65 | No risk factors | Every 1-2 years
People Over 65 | With or without risk factors | Annually

Purpose of the test
The purpose of HDL-C testing is to assess your cardiovascular health, including your risk for heart disease. HDL-C is considered to be a good type of cholesterol that is associated with a lower risk of coronary heart disease events.
Measuring HDL-C and total cholesterol together in the same blood sample allows the doctor to easily calculate the ratio of HDL-C to non-HDL cholesterol. This is important for assessing your cardiovascular health and allows the doctor to understand the relative amounts of good and bad cholesterols.
Testing HDL-C can play a role in screening, monitoring, and diagnosing problems that affect your heart, blood vessels, and blood circulation.
Screening
Screening is looking for health problems before any symptoms have occurred. The goal of cardiovascular screening is to better address problems by finding them at an earlier stage.
Screening is one of the most common ways that HDL-C testing is used. In both children and adults who do not have symptoms of cardiovascular problems, cholesterol levels may be checked periodically.
A low level of HDL-C has been tied to an elevated risk of problems like heart disease and stroke. It is also associated with type 2 diabetes. For this reason, HDL-C testing can be used for the early detection of potentially serious health concerns.
Based on an analysis of blood levels of total cholesterol, HDL-C, and LDL cholesterol, doctors can use special formulas to determine whether a patient’s risk level is borderline, intermediate, or high.
Monitoring
In many cases, it is necessary to track cholesterol levels over time. This is known as monitoring, and it is typical for HDL-C to be tested at set intervals. The most common situations in which HDL-C is monitored over time include:
After a prior abnormal cholesterol test:If you have had a previous cholesterol test with low HDL-C or high LDL cholesterol, you may have ongoing testing to monitor your lipid levels.
After a prior abnormal cholesterol test:
After a prior cardiovascular problem:If you have been diagnosed with heart disease or have had a heart attack in the past, cholesterol testing can be part of monitoring your health over time.
After a prior cardiovascular problem:
After starting treatment to reduce cardiovascular risk:Sometimes doctors will recommend lifestyle changes or medications to improve your cholesterol levels, and ongoing testing can assess your response to the prescribed treatment.
After starting treatment to reduce cardiovascular risk:
Diagnosis
Less often, HDL cholesterol tests are for diagnosis, which is identifying the cause of a health problem after symptoms have started.
Doctors may order cholesterol tests if you have certain cardiovascular symptoms. HDL-C levels are a consideration in the diagnosis of metabolic syndrome, a set of risk factors for diabetes, stroke, and coronary heart disease. Cholesterol testing can also be involved in identifying some health problems affecting other organs.
What does the test measure?
An HDL-C test analyzes a sample of blood to see how much cholesterol is present within HDL particles. Cholesterol, a waxy substance important for basic cell function such as the formation of cell membranes and certain hormones, is transported through the body in the blood within lipoproteins made up of fat and protein.
There are multiple kinds of lipoproteins that can carry cholesterol including HDL, LDL, and very low-density lipoproteins (VLDL).
Cholesterol in LDL and VLDL particles can build up in the arteries and cause cardiovascular problems. In contrast, HDL particles transport cholesterol to the liver so that it can be eliminated from the body. Through this and other functions, HDL-C helps protect against hardening and blockages of the arteries.
In practice, virtually all HDL-C tests also measure total cholesterol in addition, which is the sum of cholesterol found in all the different kinds of lipoproteins. By subtracting HDL-C from total cholesterol, the doctor can determine the amount of non-HDL cholesterol that is present. In addition, tests like a lipid panel may use a mathematical formula to calculate the amount of LDL cholesterol in your blood sample.
When should I get this test?
Whether an HDL-C test is appropriate depends on your specific circumstances.
As a screening test, there are no universally agreed-upon recommendations regarding how often to measure cholesterol levels. In general, screening is started earlier if you have risk factors such as high blood pressure, cigarette smoking, diabetes, or a family history of heart disease at an earlier age. Ongoing cholesterol testing may occur more often if you have one or more of these risk factors.
People without an elevated risk for cardiovascular problems usually start screening at a later age and often have longer intervals between cholesterol tests.
It is best if you talk with your doctor about the most appropriate screening plan for your specific situation. An overview of common recommendations for cholesterol screening is listed in the table below:
Females Age 20-55
Females Age 55-65
Screening is frequently done with a lipid panel, especially for an initial test. However, some screening may be done with only total cholesterol and HDL-C measurement.
When used to monitor cholesterol over time, HDL-C testing may be recommended if you have already been diagnosed with coronary heart disease.
Tracking cholesterol levels can also be important if you have had cardiovascular problems or abnormal cholesterol levels in the past. If you are receiving treatment for these issues, repeated HDL-C testing may be used to monitor your response to therapy.
Although principally used to detect cardiovascular issues, abnormalities in HDL-C can occur with other health problems affecting the thyroid, pancreas, or liver. As a result, cholesterol testing may be involved in the diagnostic process for a range of medical conditions.
Receiving test results
After the blood draw, results from an HDL-C test are typically ready within a few days. A full test report is usually sent to you either electronically or by mail. Your physician may also contact you to discuss your results.
Point-of-care tests with a fingerstick are generally able to deliver results within minutes. Results for these tests are often displayed visually on the test strip or device.
At-home tests that involve sending a blood sample to a laboratory will take longer as the sample must be mailed to the lab and then analyzed.
Interpreting test results
HDL-C is generally measured and reported in milligrams per deciliter of blood (mg/dL). Your test report will show your HDL-C level as well as the reference range for normal or desirable HDL-C levels.
Several factors are involved in the interpretation of your HDL-C test, including:
Your age
Your sex
Your health history and cardiovascular risk factors
Your total cholesterol and other lipid levels
Since HDL-C is known as “good cholesterol,” a higher level is better, and HDL-C above 60 mg/dL is generally considered to be excellent.
For most people, an HDL-C level that is above 60 mg/dL is associated with reduced cardiovascular risk. However, high HDL-C can occur because of some medications, alcohol abuse, or thyroid problems. High HDL-C can also occur in some inherited conditions. In these less common cases, high HDL-C may not be beneficial.
HDL-C levels that are under 40 mg/dL are considered to be low, although some organizations consider levels under 50 mg/dL in females to be low.
Low HDL-C is a risk factor for cardiovascular problems including serious conditions like heart disease and stroke. Also, low HDL-C can be a reflection of an underlying condition like diabetes. The health risks of low HDL-C can be increased when it occurs in conjunction with other abnormal cholesterol levels, such as high levels of “bad” LDL cholesterol, or with issues like high blood pressure.
Other things that can cause low HDL-C levels include specific inherited conditions, certain medications, some infections, and many medical conditions that cause inflammation.
HDL-C is an important measurement, but it is rarely evaluated alone. By considering HDL-C along with other factors, including levels of LDL cholesterol and other aspects of your overall health, your doctor can better assess your cardiovascular risk.
As a result, it is essential to discuss the results of an HDL-C test with your doctor because they are in the best position to explain what the results mean for your health.
Whether you will need follow-up tests depends on the results of your HDL-C test.
If you have no risk factors for cardiovascular problems and have healthy levels of HDL and non-HDL cholesterol, you typically do not need any immediate follow-up testing. However, your doctor may recommend repeated cholesterol screening every few years.
If you have low HDL-C or other cardiovascular risk factors, you may need follow-up tests. These could include repeated or expanded cholesterol tests, and/or cardiac stress tests.
If you have an abnormal result on a point-of-care or at-home test, it is normal to have a follow-up cholesterol test with a blood draw so that your blood can be analyzed by a laboratory.
Talking with your doctor can provide the most detailed information about your HDL-C test results. Some of the following questions may be useful in obtaining detailed explanations from your physician:
What was my HDL-C level? Is that level healthy for me?
Were any other types of cholesterol measured? If so, what were the results of those measurements?
Do I have risk factors for cardiovascular disease?
Should I have another cholesterol test? If so, when?
Are there any other tests that you recommend to evaluate my cardiovascular health?
Do you recommend any lifestyle changes or treatments to reduce my risk of cardiovascular disease?

Direct LDL Cholesterol
Purpose of the test
The purpose of a direct LDL cholesterol test is to determine the amount of “bad” LDL cholesterol in the blood. Assessing LDL cholesterol levels can be involved in health screening, monitoring, and diagnosis.
Screeningis looking for evidence of health problems before any symptoms are present. Evaluating LDL cholesterol levels can play an important role in screening for cardiovascular disease risk. Early detection of high levels of LDL cholesterol can help identify people who are more likely to develop heart disease or experience a heart attack or stroke.
Screening
Monitoringis checking how a condition progresses over time.LDL cholesterol may be tested periodically to assess cardiovascular health and testing can also be used to see if treatment to lower LDL cholesterol has been effective.
Monitoring
Diagnosisis the process of identifying the cause of health problems after symptoms have started. A direct LDL cholesterol test may be part of the diagnostic process for cardiovascular problems. Cholesterol levels may also be tested for certain conditions that affect the pancreas, liver, and thyroid.
Diagnosis
What does the test measure?
A direct LDL cholesterol test measures the amount of cholesterol found inside of LDL in a sample of blood.
Cholesterol is a waxy substance that contributes to important cell functions such as cell membrane generation and steroid hormones synthesis. Lipoproteins are particles made of fat and protein that transport cholesterol in the blood, allowing it to move through the body. Although cholesterol is necessary for normal cell activity, having too much cholesterol can have negative health effects.
Cholesterol is categorized into different types by the kind of lipoprotein particle that carries it. LDL cholesterol, which is transported inside LDL particles, is referred to as a “bad” cholesterol because it can accumulate in the arteries and heighten the risk of heart attack, heart disease, and stroke.
When should I get a direct LDL cholesterol test?
Direct measurement of LDL cholesterol is not a routine cholesterol test. Instead, it is most often used if you need a cholesterol test but may have high levels of fat molecules called triglycerides.
High triglycerides can invalidate the formula used to calculate LDL cholesterol. As a result, the doctor may recommend a direct LDL cholesterol test if you had high levels of triglycerides on a prior test or if you have risk factors for high triglycerides.
Conditions associated with high triglycerides levels include:
Type 2 diabetes
Obesity
Use of certain medications
Significant alcohol consumption
If you previously had cholesterol testing with a direct LDL cholesterol test, your doctor may recommend that any future screening or monitoring also be done with a direct LDL cholesterol measurement. Keeping the test method consistent makes it easier to compare results of different tests.
Receiving test results
Results from a direct LDL cholesterol test are often available within several business days after your blood draw. The results may be provided to you by your doctor during a phone call or follow-up visit. Results can also be delivered with a test report delivered by mail or through an online health portal.
Interpreting test results
Your direct LDL cholesterol level is normally listed in milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) of blood, although some labs provide a measurement in millimoles per liter (mmol/L).
In addition to your LDL cholesterol level, the test report will show the reference range used to interpret your test result. The reference range shows LDL cholesterol levels that the lab considers to be normal.
In general, it is desirable to have LDL cholesterol levels below 100 mg/dL.
High levels of LDL cholesterol can lead to a condition called arteriosclerosis. This is an accumulation of plaque in the arteries and can contribute to cardiovascular diseases like coronary heart disease, heart attack, and stroke.
It is important to remember, though, that cholesterol numbers are evaluated within the context of your overall health. Your doctor will also consider your age, sex, family health history, levels of other types of cholesterol, and additional risk factors for cardiovascular disease. Your current LDL cholesterol level may also be compared to your level on prior tests.
A doctor is in the best position to account for these factors, explain the significance of your direct LDL cholesterol test, and discuss whether any treatment is appropriate to modify your risk of cardiovascular disease.
Very low levels of LDL cholesterol are uncommon but can occur with certain health conditions. When low LDL cholesterol is detected, further tests are typically needed to determine its cause.
When you receive the results from a direct LDL cholesterol test, some of these questions may be helpful to bring up with your doctor:
What was my measured LDL cholesterol level?
Was my LDL cholesterol normal?
Do I have other risk factors for cardiovascular disease?
Do you recommend any additional tests?
Should I take another direct LDL cholesterol test in the future?
Do you recommend any treatments to improve my cardiovascular health?

